
### Replacement cypher (monoalphabetic substitution)

Substitute each letter with another letter. Fixed cipher, each encrypted letter always corresponds univocally to the same unencrypted letter.

Brute force cipher breaking is highly complex, however:

- letters change their individual identity but not their groupings
- the cipher can be broken by matching the relative frequency of letters with the ones in the unencrypted alphabet

### Nulls

Using least frequent symbols in positions that do not alter the meaning, e.g. instead of spaces. The symbol itself can be called through some sort of escape sequence, like repeating it twice.

### Homophones

Use of a sequence of several symbols to substitute singular frequent characters. This changes the distribution of symbols to make it less recognizable.

### Code words

Whole word substitution. The code word needs to be diffused along with the message, which might fall into the attacker's hands. No significant increase of protection over monoalphabetic substitution.

## More complex approaches

Two possible lines:

- multiple encrypting alphabets
	- Leon Battista Alberti
	- Vigenère (predecessor of modern encryption)
- encryption of multiple letters as a unit
	- Porta
	- Playfair

### Alberti cypher disk

Uses a rotating disk with letters both inside and outside the disk. Rotating the inner disk changes the cipher. For example, two different ciphers may be alternated for even and odd letters.

### Porta cipher

It encrypts letters in pairs through a $26 \times 26$ encryption matrix that assigns each pair to its cell number. The key can be changed by changing the cipher numbers (even by substituting them with symbols) or the letters on row and column headers.

### Vigenère cipher

Treat letters as numbers and sum them the cipher, $\mathrm{mod}~26$.

If the key has $t$ letters, the text will be stripped from blank spaces and broken up into groups of $t$ letters. After that, each letter will be summed ($\mathrm{mod}~26$) to the corresponding letter in the key.

It was considered unbreakable for a long time. The possible keys are $26^t$ where $t$ is the key size.

It's resistant to frequency analysis. Babbage and Kasiski realized that the length of the key can be deduced from repeating letters.

### Grids

Girolamo Cardano. Even-sized grid with holes in certain points. By alternatively rotating the grid in its four possible positions, the message can be read.

### Playfair cipher

$5 \times 5$ matrix, with the key at the beginning and the rest of the alphabet, in order, following it. It considers letters in pairs. Digrams with repeating letters add an "X" in between. Each digram marks the vertices of the diagonal of a rectangle on the matrix. The digram gets substituted by choosing the letters on the other diagonal.

It's better than a monoalphabetic cipher but easy to break using digram frequency analysis.


## One-time pad (Vernam Cipher)

Perfect cipher: the encrypted and unencrypted messages are independent. The key is a set of $n$ random independent binary bits, that are $XOR$-ed with the message itself, also $n$-sized.
