
## Cipher disks and rotors

Cipher disks based on the Alberti cipher were the state of the art until the First World War. By the end of it, the first electromechanical rotors were built. Couples of metal disks that are connected by electrical wires with a permutation. One unit is similar to the Alberti cipher, but many interconnected rotors, rotating for each set of letters, are way safer. With 26 disks and $n$ rotors, the permutations are $26^n$.

## Engima machine

It was based on three rotors, the configuration of which was changed every day. The rotors were connected to a "reflector", a disk that sent the signal back through the rotors making the cipher symmetrical. A keyboard was used for input, and the encrypted result was shown through lights representing letters.

The first rotor (furthest from the reflector) rotates at each character. The second rotates every 26 rotations of the first, unless the third has to rotate too, the third rotates on each turn of the second. That makes $26 \times 25 \times 16 = 16900$ disk permutations. On top of that, 6 couples of letters were connected to each other on a connector board, increasing the number of permutations.

Every day the new key was sent. The key was sent twice. Weaknesses:

- no letter encrypts itself
- letters do not encrypt contiguous letters
- the cipher is symmetrical
- keys are short

Some words were in a fixed position (e.g. `WETTER`, "weather" in weather reports), giving an advantage to the Allies in code breaking. Two "decoding bombs", Victory and Agnus Dei.

The Kriegsmarine used an 8-rotor machine with a rotating reflector and did not use stereotypical formulas.

---

Traditional ciphers are text-based, unlike modern ciphers that need to be digital to cover all kinds of information.

*Honeypot*: bait resource within a secure system that authorized users do not access - whoever accesses it is an attacker that fell into the trap.

---

# Symmetrical ciphers

Both writer and reader use the same key.

Kerckhoffs' principle: the security of a cryptographic system must depend only on the security of the key and not on the security of the system.

4 attacks:

1. known ciphertext attack
2. known plaintext attack
3. chosen plaintext attack
4. chosen ciphertext attack

*Known ciphertext / plaintext* : encrypted or unencrypted messages are captured by the attacker.

*Chosen plaintext / ciphertext*: the attacker can decide which messages are sent, before or after encryption, without knowing the key.

The Vigenère cipher is easily broken with a known ciphertext attack.
By finding repeating patterns, their distance is a multiple of the key length.

Coincidence index: probability of two random characters in a string being the same. It changes depending on the language. It can be used to find the length of the key.

Mutual coincidence string: probability of two randomly chosen characters, one from a first string and the other from a second string, being equal.
It can be used for finding the correct key given its length.

Block vs stream ciphers: in blocks vs character-by-character. The cleartext is broken up into equally sized blocks, which are then encrypted one at a time.

Feistel block encryption (1973): based on permutations and substitution within blocks. Principles (derived from Shannon's 1949 work):

- diffusion: mutiple unencrypted characters can lead to the same encrypted character
- confusion: hard to detect statistical relationships between encrypted text and keys
